.TH UCODE-LSP 1 "2026-03-18" "0.6.16" "ucode-lsp manual"
.SH NAME
ucode-lsp \- language server and static checker for ucode
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B ucode-lsp
[\fIoptions\fR] [\fIpaths\fR...]
.br
.B ucode-lsp \-\-stdio
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B ucode-lsp
is a language server and static analysis tool for the ucode scripting
language used in OpenWrt.
.PP
When invoked without a transport flag, it scans \fB.uc\fR files and prints
diagnostics (errors and warnings) to stdout, similar to \fBtsc\fR.
When invoked with \fB\-\-stdio\fR, it runs as an LSP server for use with
editors like Neovim or VS Code.
.SH MODES
.TP
.B (default)
Check mode. Scans \fB.uc\fR files in the given paths (or the current
directory) and prints diagnostics. Exits with code 1 if errors are found.
.TP
.B \-\-stdio
LSP server mode. Communicates over stdin/stdout using the Language Server
Protocol. Used by editors.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-\-verbose
Show all diagnostics including info and hints. By default, only errors and
warnings are shown.
.TP
.B \-\-help
Show a brief help message and exit.
.TP
.B \-\-version
Show the version number and exit.
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
No errors found (warnings may still be present).
.TP
.B 1
One or more errors found.
.TP
.B 2
Invalid usage (unknown option, missing file, etc.).
.SH OUTPUT FORMAT
Diagnostic lines are printed to stdout in the format:
.PP
.RS
\fIfile\fR(\fIline\fR,\fIcol\fR): \fIseverity\fR [\fIcode\fR]: \fImessage\fR
.RE
.PP
Summary and error messages are printed to stderr.
.SH TYPE ANNOTATIONS
.B ucode-lsp
uses JSDoc comments to provide type information for static analysis.
Annotations must use the \fB/** ... */\fR comment style.
.SS @param \- Parameter Types
Annotate function parameters with their expected types:
.PP
.RS
.nf
/**
 * @param {string} name \- The user's name
 * @param {number} age
 */
function greet(name, age) { ... }
.fi
.RE
.PP
An alternative bare syntax is also supported:
.PP
.RS
.nf
/** @param name string \- The user's name */
.fi
.RE
.SS @returns \- Return Types
Document the return type of a function:
.PP
.RS
.nf
/** @returns {string} The greeting message */
function greet(name) { ... }
.fi
.RE
.PP
Note: return types are currently parsed for documentation but type inference
uses the actual return statements.
.SS @typedef / @property \- Custom Types
Define named object types with typed properties:
.PP
.RS
.nf
/**
 * @typedef {object} PkgInfo
 * @property {string} name \- Package name
 * @property {string} version \- Semantic version
 * @property {boolean?} installed \- Whether installed
 */

/** @param {PkgInfo} pkg */
function install(pkg) {
    pkg.name;       // autocomplete + type: string
    pkg.installed;  // type: boolean | null
}
.fi
.RE
.PP
Typedefs are scoped to the file they are defined in.
.SS Supported Types
.TP
.B Primitives
\fBstring\fR, \fBnumber\fR, \fBinteger\fR (\fBint\fR), \fBdouble\fR (\fBfloat\fR),
\fBboolean\fR (\fBbool\fR), \fBarray\fR, \fBobject\fR, \fBfunction\fR, \fBnull\fR,
\fBregex\fR (\fBregexp\fR)
.TP
.B Module types
Builtin modules can be used directly as types:
\fBfs\fR, \fBuci\fR, \fBubus\fR, \fBuloop\fR, \fBmath\fR, \fBio\fR, \fBlog\fR,
\fBdebug\fR, \fBdigest\fR, \fBnl80211\fR, \fBresolv\fR, \fBrtnl\fR, \fBsocket\fR,
\fBstruct\fR, \fBzlib\fR.
The \fBmodule:\fR prefix is also accepted: \fB{module:fs}\fR.
.TP
.B Object types
Module object types provide method/property completion:
\fBfs.file\fR, \fBfs.dir\fR, \fBfs.proc\fR, \fBfs.statvfs\fR,
\fBio.handle\fR, \fBuci.cursor\fR, \fBnl80211.listener\fR,
\fBuloop.timer\fR, \fBuloop.handle\fR, \fBuloop.process\fR, \fBuloop.task\fR,
\fBuloop.interval\fR, \fBuloop.signal\fR, \fBuloop.pipe\fR,
\fBexception\fR.
.TP
.B Union types
Combine types with \fB|\fR: \fB{string|number}\fR, \fB{fs.file|null}\fR.
.TP
.B Optional types
Append \fB?\fR to make a type nullable: \fB{string?}\fR is equivalent to
\fB{string|null}\fR.
.TP
.B import() expressions
Reference types from other modules:
.RS
.nf
{import('fs')}           \- builtin module type
{import('fs').file}      \- object type from module
{import('./config')}      \- default export from local file
{import('./config').name} \- named export or default export property
.fi
.RE
.SS Cross\-File Types with import()
You can reference types from other \fB.uc\fR files using import().
.PP
Named exports (\fBexport const\fR, \fBexport function\fR):
.PP
.RS
.nf
// lib/types.uc
export const config = {
    host: 'localhost',
    port: 8080,
    enabled: true,
};

// main.uc
/** @param {import('./lib/types').config} cfg */
function start(cfg) {
    cfg.host;     // autocomplete + type: string
    cfg.port;     // type: number
    cfg.enabled;  // type: boolean
}
.fi
.RE
.PP
Default exports:
.PP
.RS
.nf
// lib/types.uc
export default {
    host: 'localhost',
    port: 8080,
};

// main.uc
/** @param {import('./lib/types')} config */
function start(config) {
    config.host;  // type: string
    config.port;  // type: number
}
.fi
.RE
.PP
You can also access a property of the default export:
.PP
.RS
.nf
// lib/types.uc
export default {
    db: { host: 'localhost', port: 5432 },
    app: { name: 'myapp', debug: false },
};

// main.uc
/** @param {import('./lib/types').db} conn */
function connect(conn) {
    conn.host;  // type: string
    conn.port;  // type: number
}
.fi
.RE
.PP
When a name matches both a named export and a default export property,
the named export takes priority.
.SS Strict Mode
When a file contains \fB'use strict'\fR, the analyzer emits info\-level
diagnostics (UC7003) for function parameters that lack \fB@param\fR
annotations. Use \fB\-\-verbose\fR in check mode to see these.
.SH DIAGNOSTIC CODES
.SS Parser Errors
Syntax errors detected during parsing.
.SS Semantic Diagnostics (ucode-semantic)
.TP
.B UC1005
Variable shadows a variable from an outer scope.
.TP
.B UC2006, UC2007
printf/sprintf format string errors: wrong number of arguments or
incompatible argument types.
.TP
.B UC4001
Unreachable code after return, break, continue, or die()/exit().
.TP
.B UC7001
Unknown type in @param annotation.
.TP
.B UC7002
@param name does not match any function parameter.
.TP
.B UC7003
Function parameters missing @param annotations (strict mode only).
.TP
.B incompatible\-function\-argument
Argument type does not match what the builtin function expects.
.TP
.B nullable\-argument
Argument may be null where a non\-null value is required.
.SH EDITOR SETUP
.SS Neovim (0.11+)
Add to \fB~/.config/nvim/init.lua\fR:
.PP
.RS
.nf
vim.filetype.add({ extension = { uc = 'ucode' } })

vim.lsp.config('ucode', {
  cmd = { 'ucode-lsp', '\-\-stdio' },
  filetypes = { 'ucode' },
  root_markers = { '.git' },
})
vim.lsp.enable('ucode')
.fi
.RE
.SS VS Code
Install the \fBucode Language Support\fR extension from the VS Code
marketplace.
.SH EXAMPLES
Check all .uc files in the current directory:
.PP
.RS
.B ucode-lsp
.RE
.PP
Check a specific directory:
.PP
.RS
.B ucode-lsp src/
.RE
.PP
Check a single file with verbose output:
.PP
.RS
.B ucode-lsp \-\-verbose router.uc
.RE
.PP
Pipe diagnostics to count errors:
.PP
.RS
.B ucode-lsp src/ | grep \-c error
.RE
.SH AUTHORS
Noah B. Peterson
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR node (1),
.BR nvim (1)
.PP
GitHub: https://github.com/NoahBPeterson/ucode-lsp
